So in the last lecture of this course, we
will look at this celebrated question about
P and NP, which is often mentioned as one
of the last and most important open problems
in Computer Science.
So, we have seen that a checking algorithm
is something which allows us to verify whether
or not a given problemÕs solution is valid.
So, a checking algorithm does not necessarily
solve the problem itself, but what it can
do is take an input to the problem, a potential
solution to that problem, and validate whether
or not that solution is indeed one. So, without
having to solve the problem itself, it can
just check with a given solution is a valid
solution or not.
So, the class NP is a class of problems for
which such checking algorithms exist with
the additional constraint that the check runs
in polynomial time in the size of the input.
So, the checking should be efficient, so in
all the problems, we have seen in the last
lecture, this is in fact true. Factorization
is in NP, because given two factors; we can
multiply them efficiently to get the answer,
if we want and check.
Satisfiability, again, because we just have
to take the assignment of true, false to the
formula variables and verify, whether the
formula evaluates to true after that. Again,
traveling salesman with the bounded version,
we can take a set of a given path, check it
is a simple cycle, add up the weights and
verify that the bound is satisfied, likewise
vertex cover and independent set. So, these
are all in NP, because the solution can be
validated efficiently with respect to the
input size.
One thing to note is that in problems like
traveling salesman, vertex cover and independent
set, we took an optimization problem and converted
it into a bounded checking problem. But we
also say that the bound could then be exercised
using binary search in order to find the actual
answer, so this binary search has the logarithmic
factor. So, overall in some sense there is
no loss of generality, because you take a
polynomial times step, and then you multiplied
by logarithmic thing, so everything is still
the same.
So, there is no difference journey between
the pure checking problems like satisfiability
and the modified checking problems which involve
introducing a bound, a traveling salesman
or vertex cover.
So, why is this class called NP, so NP comes
from the word non deterministic polynomial
time, so this is a historical reference. So,
it refers to the fact that these correspond
to problems where you can non deterministically
guess the solution, you can magically produce
the solution and then in polynomial time,
you can verify whether the solution is correct
or not.
So, the actual origin of this term comes from
computability theory, from theory of non deterministic
turing machines. So, if we have studied that,
then you will know, why it is called NP, but
if you are not studied that, it is not so
important us to realize, what it implies for
algorithms. So, NP comes from non deterministic
polynomial time, which in terms comes from
turing machines.
So, the two classes that people talk about
a P and NP. So, we have just seen what NP
is, so what is P? So, P is just the class
of problems which we have been trying to explore
in this course. These are problems for which
you have a worst case algorithm which runs
in polynomial time. So, recall that we said
right at the beginning that we are looking
at problems of the form N squared, N cubed
then all that, we probably looking at even
less in terms of practical things or things
like N log N, but we certainly do not want
to be a N and N factorial.
So, P is a class of all problems with regular
polynomial time complexity in terms of worst
case. Now, by all definition, everything in
P is also in NP, because we do not need to
get a solution to check it, because it is
in P, we can actually generate the solution
ourselves. So, checking algorithm ask somebody
to give us an input and a propose solution
and then validate it. A problem in P, we can
actually generate the solutions, so we can
validate again and therefore, every problem
in P is actually in NP.
So, the question that people want to know
is whether P is equal to NP. So, it is a converse
group, is it possible that whenever I have
an efficient checking algorithm, I also have
an efficient algorithm to generate a solution.
So, intuitively this is does not seen to be
the case, as we observed, the teacher who
was checking the factorization homework, need
not even know how to factorize, teacher only
needs to know, how to multiply, so it seems
intuitively much simpler to check a solution,
then to actually generate one. So, let us
see whether this intimation can be made formal.
So, why do people believe that P is not equal
to NP? Well, one of the reasons is just from
experience or it is empirical. So, we have
seen many natural problems, factorization,
satisfiability, traveling salesman, vertex
cover, independent set, these are all in NP.
We have seen that vertex cover and independent
set can be reduced to each other. Today, we
will see that some other NP problems can also
be reduced each other.
So, in fact, you can find that all these problem
actually are inter reducing, this means that
the effectively have the same level of hardness.
Because, when things are reduced, one between
one and other, either you can transport efficient
solutions or you can claim inefficients. But
effectively there all of the same type, you
can solve one, you can solve the other in
roughly the same amount of time.
So, all it takes is solve any one of these
and all of these problems will then have an
efficient solution. But people have been trying
these problems from different angles from
many years, now and nobodies have found one.
Therefore, there is good experimental evidence
that there is no good solution for these.
So, let us look at these inter reducibilityÕs
a little more closely. So, we start with Boolean
satisfiability, recall that in Boolean satisfiability,
we have clauses, clauses are composed by disjunction
of literals, so we take x or not y or z. So,
we have these all stunt together to form a
clause, put these clauses together with an
act. So, in general, we argued that it is
hard to think of how to find the satisfying
assignment, but if we get an assignment of
valuation, values for the variables, we can
quickly check whether it makes true or not.
So, restricted form of satisfiability is called
-SAT. In -SAT, we have only clauses like
x or not y or z or we could have two also,
x or y and so on. So, we could have even trivial
things like z, but remember, if we have a
clause it says that, the only way to make
it, this forces mid to make z true, because
there is no option. If I add x or y, I can
make x true or y true, so our clause like
this does not contribute much more problem,
because it forces a valuation for a particular
variable, and then I can reduce the problem
to one which has or . So, -SAT has typically
two variables or three variables, but not
have more than three, it does not have four
or five variables.
So, the first claim is that -SAT is as general
a SAT. So, we have show this just by a simple
example. So, supposing I have a given clause,
which has five variables like this. So, what
I want to do is, I want to have only three
variables, so what I will do, slice of this
part. So, I will keep the first two and I
slice of this part, so I will introduce a
new variable a and I will say it is v or not
w or a and I put a not with rest.
So, now what is this tell me, so this tells
me that supposing in this case, that these
are both false. Then, in order to make this
true and must make a true, but a is true,
then this is false on the other side, so that
means that this clauses is true, one of these
has true. So, in other words, it is saying
both a v and w, not w are false, then one
of the other three variables must be true,
which is exactly what the original problem;
one of these five must be true. On the other
hand, if v or not w is true, then I can effort
to set a false, if a is false not even become
true, then I am no application of the remaining
variables.
So, the claim is that by this expansion by
removing by this one, splitting away the first
two variables and adding this in intermediate
thing linking the two clauses at produce two
clauses, which have same satisfiability as
the original clause. Now, again I have unfortunately
too many variables here, so what I will do
is, I will now again keep two and split the
response.
So, I will keep not a x a little new variable
b, and then I will take not b and take remaining
b, at this point, fortunately I now reduce
everything into three variables, I can stop
it, if I have four variable still, I have
do same thing a little c and not c and so
on. So, in this way, I can take any clause
which has more than three literals and systematically
decompose it by adding new literals into sequence
of three literal clauses.
So, I can convert any clause which is not
in -SAT into a sequence of -SAT clauses
and how big is sequence, well it is going
to be portion to the number of literals in
the clause. So, the blow up in my formula
is going to be linear in the original formula,
that is important, because we said that will
be do reductions, we want the reduction part
to be efficient to say that, we are not spending
so much time of the reduction, other we cannot
transfer efficient see claims at those.
So, what this tells us in that, if SAT is
hard does we believe, then so is -SAT, because
I reduce SAT to -SAT.
So, far we have seen reductions which are
not very perhaps surprising, we have seen
independent set and vertex cover, but these
are similar problems. Similarly, we have seen
SAT and -SAT, these are similar problems.
Now, what we are going to do is, we are going
to bridge the gap between these two different
problems. We are going to look at -SAT and
say that -SAT actually you can reduce to
independent set, which is the little bit more
surprising, because they seen come from variable
different domains.
So, here is a typical -SAT formula. So, we
have , , , clauses and each of them as
at most three literal, so this one has two
literal, so other one that theÉ So, since
we have -SAT, then we have a structure which
is bounded by three. So, we will represent
every clause by this triangle and in the triangle
will put a label which indicates the literal.
So, not x is replace by not x is in this thing,
y and so this not x or y or z not z is this
triangle. Similarly, this is not x or not
y or z, so in this way every clause contributes
the triangle to may graph.
So, what is this triangle signify, this triangle
signifies that if may independent set picks
one of these things, say y, then it cannot
pick the other two. So, what this is saying
is this is going to make exactly one of these
things, it is going to identify for me which
of the literals true in order to make this
formula actually work out with. So, it is
kind of giving me a witness from each clause.
So, not it well to be valid witness y is
here, then I cannot pick not wide to be the
witness to the next hour, because y and not
y contribute each other. So, in addition to
the triangle, I have these green edges saying
that variable and it is compliment will be
connected by green edge. So, there should
be some more green edges perhaps connecting
this y to that not y is, so there should be
clause, so this y to that not y.
So, every variable is connected to is compliment
to indicate that if one is there, the other
cannot be there. So, what we independent set
is saying is this is time to pick out a solution,
is trying to pick out a solution by looking
at each clause. And saying that may be I pick
y here, I pick y here, then I am go to rule
out these things and I will maybe I can now
I pick y there, then I to pick something here.
So, maybe I pick x here, if I pick x here,
I ruled out that not x, you have to ruled
out this not x.
Now, I am trouble, because I do not have anything,
so maybe I should could not a pick that x.
So, therefore, I go back and say that, this
should pick this not x, this not x will ruled
out this x, ruled out this x, force meet to
keep this z. Now, if I have an independent
set of size , then I am done, so I can say
that the solution now I want is that x goes
to false, y goes to true and z goes to true.
So, the existence of independent set on this
particular thing of size , which picks out
per cost. So, notice that within a clause,
I can only pick . So, if I have four clauses
and if I insist on the size are the independent
set being the number of process, then I would
definitely have got one witness per literal.
And those witnesses at we mutually consist,
because I connect z and not z x and not x
everywhere by edges which rule out the same
variable feb by founding reset true in one
times, false in one times.
So, this independent set now picks out those
literal which four, which make my formula
true. So, if there is an independent set of
size , then every clause can be made true
and this set of four clauses. And therefore,
I have a solution to -SAT and if there is
no independent set of size , there is no
solution. So, -SAT reduces independent set
which is a bit more surprising, when our reduction
as we set from SAT to -SAT, which are both
similar looking problems.
Over from independent set to vertex cover
and backward which are very directly structural
related problem in the same type of graph.
So, this is the surprising thing is Boolean
satisfiability and vertex issues, I am independent
vertices and graph are connect.
So, we are shown that -SAT reduces -SAT,
-SAT reduces independent set, independent
set and vertex cover are mutually reduce able.
Therefore, for instance because I can now
compose these reductions, SAT now reduces
to vertex and you can find in the literature
such reduction for various other problem that
traveling salesman, integer, linear programming
and so on.
Now, all these is important per remember that
we are looking in this context to reductions,
where the pre processing and post processing
step at polynomial time. Because, we want
to say there is no time loss in the reduction,
therefore, all the complexity is in the solution,
if I have a simple solution for b, I have
a simple solution for a, when I reduce a to
b.
If I have a complete solution for a, then
I cannot say that the solution reduction is
what may set complex, it is because reduction
simple, it must be only the fact with two
problems are similar that they are actually
having the same complexity. So, given this
when all these problems are inter reduce able,
it means all of them are equally hard.
Now, the famous theorem by Cook and Levin
says that every problem NP can be reduces
to stack. Now, this is the rather amazing
theorem, because this is that take everything
an NP, anything there I can reduce the SAT.
So, there is some reduction by taking an instant
that problem, I can converted into next month
of SAT, so all those insert of sat and go
back it is.
So, we have definitely not going to try and
prove this theorem here, it is enough to know
that this proof is by encoding a suitably
general module of computation. So, the original
proofs of Cook use during machines, you can
take Boolean circles are register machines,
anything which is universal, anything which
can compute every problem an NP. And then
argue that the computation of that problem,
so if something as NP, there is an NP computation,
there is a checking problem, checking algorithm.
So, you can encode the behavior of that checking
algorithm for that problem in SAT and therefore,
it turns out that SAT is equivalent are everything
reduces to SAT.
So, this gives us the notion of completeness,
we say the SAT is complete, because it belongs
to NP and every problem in NP reduces to it,
this is the definition of NP completeness.
A problem is NP complete, if first of all
it has a checking algorithm belongs to NP,
efficient checking algorithm. And in addition
every problem in NP reduces to it by a polynomial
time reduction. So, SAT by definition by the
Cook Levin theorem is NP complete, because
it belongs to NP, we know.
And the Cook Levin theorem establishes at
every problem in NP reduces to it, but now
we have seen that sat itself reduces to -SAT.
So, every problem can be reduce to SAT and
then in a further polynomial step reduce to
-SAT. So, every problem now reduces to -SAT,
the three sat is also NP, so -SAT is also
NP complete. So, this is the generic technology
now, so you have some problem which is NP
complete.
And then I reduce it my problem here that
makes b also NP complete, because provide
b is an NP, if it is not an NP, then it is
something weaker called NP hard, it is at
least a hard every problem NP, but may not
be NP itself. So, NP hard says that, it is
every problem reduces to it, but you are not
sure whether not belongs to NP, you do not
have a checking algorithm for it.
So, there are few problems like this for which
checking algorithm is not easy to describe,
but you cannot certainly show reduction. But
otherwise if can do both, you can find a checking
algorithm and every problem, you have found
some problem which in NP which NP complete
problem which reduces to it, then it is also
NP completed.
So, this brings us back to the question of
whether or not P is equal to NP. So, many
useful problems which are extremely important
day to day life scheduling, bin packing. So,
bin packing is basically now if I want to
put various objects into a container in an
optimum way or traveling salesman tours, we
want find optimal tours, all these are very
important real life problems, which people
would like the life solve efficiently.
The theory of NP completeness tells us that
all of these problems are actually inter reduce
able, and therefore equivalent to each other,
I can solve one, I can solve them on. Now,
we have this experimental evidence that since
these are important problem are large number
of smart people have been looking at this
problems from even before the time that computer
science was invented. People have been looking
at scheduling problem and bin packing problems
for very Õs of years.
Therefore, these problems, if they have not
yet yield it and efficient solution, then
it looks likely that there is no efficient
solution. Therefore, from an empirical point
of view from purely experimental evidence,
it seems to be strongly suggest that N P is
different from P. But this is not a proof
unfortunately, mathematically one has to be
argue that N P is different from P by giving
a proof by saying that is the reason why problems
some problems some N P complete problem can
never be solve using a polynomial time. This
is what is called as lower bound, so we need
to establish a lower bound.
For some N P complete problem and this is
very hard, this is very proved challenging,
N P completeness was identify by Cook and
Levin with early Õs. So, it is now more
than years, since the theory of N P completeness
itself as invented and a lot of people and
looks at problem and nobody have yet found
a direct way of doing this. So, formal proof
is elusive and is worth a million dollars,
because there is a price given by the Clay
Math Institute.
So, this is one of the celebrated open problems
and mathematics. So, with the Clay Institute
as an awarded a large price. So, somebody
does prove that this is the indeed not the
case, then there is a large price at stick.
So, with this it seems on appropriate place
to end this course.
So, I thank you all of this time.